docs/README.md, before:

# How It Works

This page explains the internal design of `go-vectorstore` and how requests move through the library.

## 1) High-level architecture

The project is split into two layers:

- `vectordata`: backend-agnostic contracts and primitives.
- `stores/postgres`: [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/index.html) + [pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector) implementation.

This keeps the public API stable while allowing additional storage engines later.

## 2) Core data model

The core record type is `vectordata.Record`:

- `ID` (string): primary key.
- `Vector` (`[]float32`): embedding values.
- `Metadata` (`map[string]any`): structured JSON metadata.
- `Content` (`*string`): optional text payload.

Search returns `vectordata.SearchResult`:

- `Record`: matched item.
- `Distance`: raw pgvector distance.
- `Score`: normalized score derived from distance.

## 3) Public API shape

Main interfaces:

- `vectordata.VectorStore`
- `vectordata.Collection`

Main operations:

- `EnsureCollection`
- `Insert`, `Upsert`
- `Get`, `Delete`, `Count`
- `SearchByVector`
- `EnsureIndexes`

All methods require `context.Context`.

## 4) Request flow

### Ensure collection

`PostgresVectorStore.EnsureCollection`:

1. Validates collection spec (`name`, `dimension`, `metric`, `mode`).
2. Ensures `vector` extension (if enabled) and schema.
3. Checks whether the table exists.
4. Creates the table or validates existing schema.
5. Returns a `PostgresCollection` handle.

Default table shape:

```sql
id text primary key,
vector vector(n) not null,
metadata jsonb not null default '{}'::jsonb,
content text
```

### Insert / Upsert

Bulk writes are chunked (`maxRowsPerStatement`) and executed as parameterized SQL.

- `Insert`: plain `INSERT`.
- `Upsert`: `INSERT ... ON CONFLICT (id) DO UPDATE`.

Each record is validated before sending:

- non-empty `ID`
- vector dimension match
- metadata JSON serialization

### Search

`SearchByVector` builds a query plan, then executes it:

1. Validate query vector dimension.
2. Choose operator by metric:
   - cosine: `<=>`
   - l2: `<->`
   - inner product: `<#>`
3. Build `distance` expression:
   - `"vector" <op> $1::vector`
4. Apply optional filter SQL.
5. Apply optional distance threshold.
6. Order by `distance ASC`, limit by `topK`.
7. Scan rows into `SearchResult`.

The pgvector operators are documented in the [pgvector README](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector#querying).

Score normalization:

- cosine: `1 - distance` ([cosine similarity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosine_similarity))
- l2: `1 / (1 + distance)` ([Euclidean distance / L2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_distance))
- inner product: `-distance` ([dot product / inner product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dot_product))

## 5) Filter system (AST -> SQL)

Filters are represented as an AST in `vectordata`:

- `Eq`, `In`, `Gt`, `Lt`, `Exists`
- `And`, `Or`, `Not`

Fields can target:

- fixed columns (`Column("id")`, `Column("content")`)
- metadata JSON paths (`Metadata("category")`, `Metadata("a", "b")`)

`CompileFilterSQL` converts AST to:

- SQL predicate fragment
- parameter list

This keeps SQL injection-safe behavior by binding values as query args.
JSON path extraction behavior comes from PostgreSQL [JSON/JSONB functions and operators](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-json.html).

## 6) Schema safety modes

`CollectionSpec.Mode` controls ensure behavior:

- `EnsureStrict`:
  - fail if expected columns/type/dimension mismatch.
- `EnsureAutoMigrate`:
  - can add missing optional columns (`metadata`, `content`).

Dimension is always validated against `vector(n)` and must match.

## 7) Index management

`EnsureIndexes` supports:

- Vector index:
  - HNSW (default for vector index creation)
  - IVFFlat (optional)
- Metadata index:
  - GIN on `metadata` JSONB
  - optional `jsonb_path_ops`

For vector indexing details:

- HNSW: [original paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320) and [overview](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hierarchical_navigable_small_world).
- IVFFlat: [FAISS index reference](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/wiki/Faiss-indexes) and [pgvector IVFFlat docs](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector#ivfflat).

For metadata indexing details:

- GIN index basics: [PostgreSQL GIN indexes](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/gin.html).
- JSONB operators / indexing context: [PostgreSQL JSON functions and operators](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-json.html).

Metric-specific operator classes are selected automatically:

- cosine -> `vector_cosine_ops`
- l2 -> `vector_l2_ops`
- inner product -> `vector_ip_ops`

## 8) Typed extension

MVP public API is record-based.  
An optional typed wrapper exists:

- `vectordata.Codec[T]`
- `vectordata.TypedCollection[T]`

This lets application code work with domain models while storage stays record-oriented.

## 9) Error model

Common exported errors:

- `ErrNotFound`
- `ErrDimensionMismatch`
- `ErrSchemaMismatch`
- `ErrInvalidFilter`

Errors are wrapped with context so callers can use `errors.Is(...)` against base error types.

## 10) Semantic-search sample flow

The sample app in `samples/semantic-search` does:

1. Build embeddings for 3 fake articles via OpenAI embeddings API.
2. Ensure a Postgres vector collection.
3. Upsert article records.
4. Ensure vector + metadata indexes.
5. Embed user query and run semantic search.
6. Print ranked top matches with score and distance.

## 11) Current scope and limits

Current MVP scope:

- Postgres + pgvector only.
- single-vector column per collection.
- metadata filtering through a focused AST.

Future extension points:

- additional backends under `stores/`.
- richer filter operators.
- optional reranking strategies.

## 12) References

- pgvector project docs: https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector
- PostgreSQL docs: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/index.html
- ANN concept: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nearest_neighbor_search
- HNSW paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320
- FAISS index families (including IVF): https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/wiki/Faiss-indexes

Commit message:

Add RAGrimosa sample app for retrieval-augmented generation

docs/README.md, after:

# How It Works

This page explains the internal design of `go-vectorstore` and how requests move through the library.

## 1) High-level architecture

The project is split into two layers:

- `vectordata`: backend-agnostic contracts and primitives.
- `stores/postgres`: [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/index.html) + [pgvector](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector) implementation.

This keeps the public API stable while allowing additional storage engines later.

## 2) Core data model

The core record type is `vectordata.Record`:

- `ID` (string): primary key.
- `Vector` (`[]float32`): embedding values.
- `Metadata` (`map[string]any`): structured JSON metadata.
- `Content` (`*string`): optional text payload.

Search returns `vectordata.SearchResult`:

- `Record`: matched item.
- `Distance`: raw pgvector distance.
- `Score`: normalized score derived from distance.

## 3) Public API shape

Main interfaces:

- `vectordata.VectorStore`
- `vectordata.Collection`

Main operations:

- `EnsureCollection`
- `Insert`, `Upsert`
- `Get`, `Delete`, `Count`
- `SearchByVector`
- `EnsureIndexes`

All methods require `context.Context`.

## 4) Request flow

### Ensure collection

`PostgresVectorStore.EnsureCollection`:

1. Validates collection spec (`name`, `dimension`, `metric`, `mode`).
2. Ensures `vector` extension (if enabled) and schema.
3. Checks whether the table exists.
4. Creates the table or validates existing schema.
5. Returns a `PostgresCollection` handle.

Default table shape:

```sql
id text primary key,
vector vector(n) not null,
metadata jsonb not null default '{}'::jsonb,
content text
```

### Insert / Upsert

Bulk writes are chunked (`maxRowsPerStatement`) and executed as parameterized SQL.

- `Insert`: plain `INSERT`.
- `Upsert`: `INSERT ... ON CONFLICT (id) DO UPDATE`.

Each record is validated before sending:

- non-empty `ID`
- vector dimension match
- metadata JSON serialization

### Search

`SearchByVector` builds a query plan, then executes it:

1. Validate query vector dimension.
2. Choose operator by metric:
   - cosine: `<=>`
   - l2: `<->`
   - inner product: `<#>`
3. Build `distance` expression:
   - `"vector" <op> $1::vector`
4. Apply optional filter SQL.
5. Apply optional distance threshold.
6. Order by `distance ASC`, limit by `topK`.
7. Scan rows into `SearchResult`.

The pgvector operators are documented in the [pgvector README](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector#querying).

Score normalization:

- cosine: `1 - distance` ([cosine similarity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cosine_similarity))
- l2: `1 / (1 + distance)` ([Euclidean distance / L2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euclidean_distance))
- inner product: `-distance` ([dot product / inner product](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dot_product))

## 5) Filter system (AST -> SQL)

Filters are represented as an AST in `vectordata`:

- `Eq`, `In`, `Gt`, `Lt`, `Exists`
- `And`, `Or`, `Not`

Fields can target:

- fixed columns (`Column("id")`, `Column("content")`)
- metadata JSON paths (`Metadata("category")`, `Metadata("a", "b")`)

`CompileFilterSQL` converts AST to:

- SQL predicate fragment
- parameter list

This keeps SQL injection-safe behavior by binding values as query args.
JSON path extraction behavior comes from PostgreSQL [JSON/JSONB functions and operators](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-json.html).

## 6) Schema safety modes

`CollectionSpec.Mode` controls ensure behavior:

- `EnsureStrict`:
  - fail if expected columns/type/dimension mismatch.
- `EnsureAutoMigrate`:
  - can add missing optional columns (`metadata`, `content`).

Dimension is always validated against `vector(n)` and must match.

## 7) Index management

`EnsureIndexes` supports:

- Vector index:
  - HNSW (default for vector index creation)
  - IVFFlat (optional)
- Metadata index:
  - GIN on `metadata` JSONB
  - optional `jsonb_path_ops`

For vector indexing details:

- HNSW: [original paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320) and [overview](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hierarchical_navigable_small_world).
- IVFFlat: [FAISS index reference](https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/wiki/Faiss-indexes) and [pgvector IVFFlat docs](https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector#ivfflat).

For metadata indexing details:

- GIN index basics: [PostgreSQL GIN indexes](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/gin.html).
- JSONB operators / indexing context: [PostgreSQL JSON functions and operators](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/functions-json.html).

Metric-specific operator classes are selected automatically:

- cosine -> `vector_cosine_ops`
- l2 -> `vector_l2_ops`
- inner product -> `vector_ip_ops`

## 8) Typed extension

MVP public API is record-based.  
An optional typed wrapper exists:

- `vectordata.Codec[T]`
- `vectordata.TypedCollection[T]`

This lets application code work with domain models while storage stays record-oriented.

## 9) Error model

Common exported errors:

- `ErrNotFound`
- `ErrDimensionMismatch`
- `ErrSchemaMismatch`
- `ErrInvalidFilter`

Errors are wrapped with context so callers can use `errors.Is(...)` against base error types.

## 10) Sample app flows

### `samples/semantic-search`

1. Build embeddings for 3 fake articles via OpenAI embeddings API.
2. Ensure a Postgres vector collection.
3. Upsert article records.
4. Ensure vector + metadata indexes.
5. Embed user query and run semantic search.
6. Print ranked top matches with score and distance.

### `samples/ragrimosa`

1. Build embeddings for manually chunked Lacrimosa story records.
2. Ensure a Postgres vector collection.
3. Upsert chunk records and ensure indexes.
4. Embed user prompt and retrieve nearest chunks from DB.
5. Send the retrieved chunks as context to OpenAI chat completions.
6. Print the grounded answer.

## 11) Current scope and limits

Current MVP scope:

- Postgres + pgvector only.
- single-vector column per collection.
- metadata filtering through a focused AST.

Future extension points:

- additional backends under `stores/`.
- richer filter operators.
- optional reranking strategies.

## 12) References

- pgvector project docs: https://github.com/pgvector/pgvector
- PostgreSQL docs: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/index.html
- ANN concept: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nearest_neighbor_search
- HNSW paper: https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.09320
- FAISS index families (including IVF): https://github.com/facebookresearch/faiss/wiki/Faiss-indexes
